Description
F. wHnTLE 2,168,726

PROPULSION 0F AIRCRAFT AND GAS TURBINES Filed Feb. 27, 19:57 2 sheets-sheet 1 wmv..

wh n Aug. 8, 1939.

AQ @a amic Wk.,

Aug'. 8, 1939. F. wHlTTLE 2,168,726

PROPULSION OF AIRCRAFT AND GAS TURBINES Filed Feb. 27, 1937 2 Sheets-Sheet 2 f4 n BOX ANAL FLOW rana/NE AxmL no w compnsssn.

Patented Aug. 8, 1939 PATENT oFFicE raorotsron or Amcmlr'r m vcas mamas Frank wmme, mmpinmn, mund Application February 27, 1937, Serial No. 128,167

` In Great Britain March 4, 1936 'I'his invention refers to apparatus, the function of which is to provide a supply of working fluid at a pressure above that of the atmosphere for the purpose of propelling an aircraft by uid reaction, such propulsion being commonly known as "jet propulsion".

A known form of .such an apparatus is one in which a centrifugal compressor compresses'alr into a combustion chamber wherein it is intended to be heated atconstant pressure by the burning of a suitable fuel, the heated products of com- .bustion then expanding through the nozzles of ther expansion, forms a supply of working uid a turbine, the function of which is 'to drive the compressor and any desired auxiliaries. The uid leaving the turbine, being capable of fur- \for the production of power as that cited above.

In a reaction propulsion system for boats or air-craft, a prior proposal is the provision of a compressor followed by a burner and delivering through propulsion nozzle means, the compressor being fed by fluid taken in at a pressure created by movement of the whole vehicle in the uid medium, and it is mentioned that the internal combustion engine which drives the compressor may be fed by part of its output. The term combustion engine as herein used includes any engine which compresses air, effects combustion in it, and is operated by the expansion-ofthe combustion products, and thus in various ways, such includes a reciprocating internal combustion engine or a compressor-burner-turbine combination in which the turbine drives the compressor.

The purpose of this invention is to provide an pose that the invention isprimarily applicable.

-According to the invention, there is combined in va fluid-reaction propulsion system for aircraft an air compressor which in eifect divides the output\ from the compressor into a rst stream which is passed out through a propulsion nozzle .and a second stream, a combustion engine supplied by the second stream, and a gas turbine supplied wholly or partly by the eiiluent gas from said engine and driving the said air compressor.

In this system the combustion products of the engine preferably contribute to the thrust by uid reaction, for example joining the main flow from which they were originally diverted before combustion. The engine referred to may be a compressor-burnr-gas .turbine combination. The system is embodied, in accordance with'the invention, in a unit for aircraft propulsion, and this in two examples takes the form diagrammatically illustrated in the drawings. Where a gas turbine is employed it may be adapted to operate with a plurality ofstages of compression of the kind in which the compressor means is in the form of a bilateral intake centrifugal compressor and may generally follow the form de scribed in relation to my British patent specification No. 456,980 and to my United States application Serial No. 78,282, filed May 6, 1936, now abandoned. It may be convenient to provide the v. whole device in the form of a hollow nacelle with an entry opening to face the direction of travel v (whereby incidentally a certain head of pressure termed "Pitot pressure.may be derived) and in such nacelle all those `components apt to lose heat may be completely housed to conserve energy. The inventionl is further to be understood by reference to the following description. Where the description or claims seem to refer to the whole or a determined part, of a flow, it is to be understood that a portion thereof may be separated and utilized for such purposes as driving n auxiliaries, heating, etc.

use it may be important to select the directions of rotationA of rotatable parts, having regard to their gyrostatic reactions. Considering this apparatus as comprising virtually a port and a starboard intake and vaccompanying reaction iets, only one side will be described, the other, apart from any question of rotational direction, being substantially identical. The initial compressors are of the axial flow single-stage type, whilst the internal combustion engine includes a conintake orifice Il, and discharging into a nacelle `52 `within which, behind` the compressor 5U is drivinggearllpoweredbyashaft connected to a driving turbine within a casing 56A. The main flow created in the first place by the compressor IlA and subject to any Pitotpressure at 5I of which advantage can` be taken, passes rearwardly through the nacelle 52 to emerge from the noule 52A. The flow from the lcompressor I is divided, part of it is diverted (and any suitable guiding means such as bailles 56A may help to divert it) into a `lateral trunk it `which is common to both starboard and` port nacelles. Within the trunk` II is housed a two-stage bilateral intake compressor, a fuller description of which can be found in the specification of my application Serial No. `18,282 and my British patent specification No. 456,976. In short, this comprises twinrst stage compressors 51 outputting to the `second stage compressor I8. From the secondary diffuser of the compressor l the second stage output is led to a combustion chamber i which is connected` to and discharges into the delivery `chamber' Il of a turbine, the mechanical output of which drives the compressor shaft il commento both I1 and 5l.` In` the combustion chamber ,a suitable fuel-burning means ila, arranged `for example somewhat in the manner of that described in relation to the above numbered specifications, This unit comprising `compressor' means, combustion means,

and turbines, is a combustion engine. It is here Vnoted that as between port and starboard sides of the whole apparatus the working directions must of course be appropriate for both port and starboard turbines to drive the shaft Il mutually. The combustion efluent expands through the vanes ofithe gas turbine rotor t2 land by a passage t3, ll, Il is delivered to the nozzle scroll of the turbine II through which these gases l expand further rejoining the main flow in the nacelle` i2 throimh the exhaust il.

In the alternative illustrated diagrammatically in Figure 2, the propelling unit comprises a `nacelle or duct Il with'a forwardly facing entry Aianda rearwardly facing exit or propulsion nozzle IIB. This nacelle encloses within its entry IIA an axial flow compressor with rotor Il driveniby a shaft 32 from an axial flow tur bine rotor 33. In practice there will be stepdown gearing All` between the turbine 33 and rotor 3|;` Also4 within the nacelle 3l is a compression ignition engine represented at 34;` this` engine drives throughits gear box 34A a centrifugal bilateral intake compressor 35 with its intakes (indicated by arrows) collecting from 1 the interior of thenacelle 30. The output of the compressor 35 is led by a duct indicated at 36A which leads such output in the direction of the arrow to the nozzle scroll 31 of the turbine I3. the emuent therefrom escaping `through the aisance duct 3l and a rearwardly facing propulsion noszle il with such energy as remains after passage through the turbine ll. This unit therefore consista in a first compressorl with divided output, a second and centrifugal compressor intaking the diverted flow of air driven by and supplying part of its `air output to the compression ignition engine ,the exhaust from which rejoins the rest of the air supply from the said second compresser to form' the working fluid in the turbine Il. To this end the engine 34 has its air intake 34B in the duct 36A and its exhaust IIC returningtothat duct. If desired, the engine 34 may also have lits own supercharger, and of course its own auxiliary apparatus. The whole output of the first compressor is finally employed for reaction propulsion.

What I claim is:

1. A gaseous jet reaction propelling unit for aircraft, comprising an air duct with an entry opening to face the direction of travel, an axial flow compressor therein, a centrifugal compressor supplied with part of the flow therefrom, a fuel burning device in the output of the centrifugal compressor, a turbine driving the centrifugal compressor and operated by the flow from `said centrifugal compressor and burning device, asecond turbine driving the axial flow compressor and operated by the exhaust 'gases from the first turbine, an exhaust passage from the second turbine into the duct behind the axial flow compressor, and an outlet orifice for the duct facing oppositely to the entry.

2. A unit according to claim 1, in which there are two ducts and associated axial flow compressors and secondturbines, and a single centrifugal compressor `unit 4connected and `cooperating `with both ducts.` A

3. Inaiiuid `reaction propulsion vsystem for aircraft, `a combination of an air compressor; a propulsion nozzle, means for dividing the output from the compressor into alfirst stream which is passed out through the propulsion nozzle and a second stream, a combustion engine supplied by the second stream, and a gas turbine supplied atleast partly by the eilluent gas from said engine and driving said air compressor.

4.A system as set forth in claim 3 in which means are provided whereby the exhaust gases from the turbine also contribute to the thrust by nuid reaction.

5. A system as set forth in claim 3, in which means are provided whereby the exhaust gases from the turbine rejoin the remainder of the compressor output before final expansion.

8. A system as claimed in claim 3 in which said engine includes a gas turbine other than that which drives said compressor, said gas `turbine being a constant pressure gas turbine, and a centrifugal compressor for supplying gas under pressure for said gas turbine and connected thereto and driven thereby.

FRANKWHITILE.